Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Dres Boston. He's a
social psychologist, statistician, and philosopher currently doing a BOF
senior postdoctoral fellowship at the Social Psychology lab at
Ghent. University. His primary research focus is the study
of moral psychology, and today we're going to talk
mostly about truly type moral dilemmas, sacrificial dilemmas, moral
cognition, and some other related topics. So Doctor Bostin,
welcome to the show. It's a huge pleasure to
everyone.
Thank you for having me and looking forward to
our chat.
So, uh, just to introduce the topic for people
who might not be familiar with what we're going
to talk about here, what are trolley type moral
dilemmas?
I mean, so there's not one official definition for
the trolley type dilemmas, of course, um, but I
would say there are, there are a class of
moral dilemmas, um, that, um, the most well-known example
of them is the, the trolley dilemma, which is
a well-known, uh, moral dilemma, possibly, maybe even the,
the most well-known dilemma, um, and so I, I,
I usually always start just by giving people the
example even though by now many people are so
familiar with it. Um, BUT just kind of ground
the discussion, uh, what we're talking about, um, so
destroyer dilemma is basically a moral dilemma that, um,
depicts a scene where a runaway trolley train is
about to run over 5 people. Um, SOMETIMES these
are 5 people that are tied to the tracks,
sometimes they're just unsuspecting workmen, but in any case,
um, the train is going to run over 5
people, and the moral dilemma poses a question, um,
imagine that you could divert, avert this disaster, um.
Usually there are multiple ways in which this can
be done, and the most classic way is imagine
you can avert this disaster by diverting the train
to a secondary track, um, which would be great,
but then unfortunately there's one other person on the
track, and so then the moral dilemma emerges. Should
you sacrifice one person to save the 5, and
the core idea behind these dilemmas is just that
they. They contrast um a desire to minimize harm,
to strive towards the greater good, with a, a
sort of refusal, a sort of um. Uh, DISAVOWMENT
of actively harming others. Sometimes that's framed in terms
of norms or rules first and principles versus consequences.
Uh, SOMETIMES people say this is about deontology versus
utilitarianism, um, but I prefer just kind of keeping
it as, as, as low level as possible and
just saying it's about, it's about, um, do you
wanna actively harm, like, are you OK with actively
harming others to pursue a greater good? Um, I
would say that is what trolley tight dilemmas are
all about. Um, WHY trolley type, um, I guess
because trolleys are the, the quintessential example. Um, THERE'S
many variations within the trolley dilemmas, but there's also
many other dilemmas that have like this same basic
shape, the same basic structure that do not involve
trolley trains whatsoever, um, hence why it's a, it's
a class of moral dilemmas, yeah.
So, I mean, please correct me if I'm wrong,
but I, I think that one of the goals
with studying or doing studies where we expose people
to truly type moral dilemmas and see how they
respond to them is to try to understand whether
people prefer uh the ontological or a consequentialist approach
to them. So what do people tend to prefer?
Do we know that?
Um, IT, it, it really depends on what specific
dilemma that you give them. Um, SO there are,
there are some dilemmas, the classic trolley dilemma where
you just have to divert the trolley train to
a secondary track, and they're like 80% of people
will prefer the, uh, the so-called utilitarian response, the
response that corresponds with, um, sacrificing one person for
the greater good, um. There's some debate on whether
we should really label these specific responses as utilitarian
or deontological. Uh YOU'RE certainly correct in that, that
the, the classic traditional way of looking at these
dilemmas and looking at these responses is to sort
of see them as proxies of these underlying philosophical
ideas, and it's about contrasting, um, the ontological versus
utilitarian. Um, BUT it's very easy to switch people's
opinion on these dilemmas like the, the, the, the,
again, the, the, much of the theorizing in this
field started with the, the observation that if you
give people the classic troy dilemma, they prefer deleitarian
response. But if you change it a little bit
around, if you ask people, um, about a variation
of a troy dilemma, the footbridge dilemma, where it's
not about diverting the trolley train to another track,
but where you have to stop the trolley. By
pushing a large stranger in front of the train
and using their considerable mass, then people tend to
refer to, the deontological response. So it really depends
on, um, the type of dilemma that you give
them. But having said, um, there is a, a
consistency across dilemmas though. So people, um, there are
a certain set of personality, uh, differences that sort
of help determine what response that people prefer in
general. And so you could say that there are
some people that are consistently more likely to prefer
the so-called utilitarian choice. There are people that are
consistently more likely to prefer to prefer the so-called
deontological choice, yeah.
Uh, BUT in one of your studies, you found
out that when confronted with a trolley problem, people
conform to the ontological but no consequentialist majorities. Could
you explain that?
Yeah, so what we did in that study was,
um, we, we confronted people with a, with a
series of these, these, these dilemmas. Not all Troy
dilemmas, some of them were the same basic structure
but different, different contents, um, and then we told
people like, hey, the majority of people prefer this
option or the majority of people prefer that option.
And what we found there is that indeed, um,
people, um, were more likely to shift their responses
in the direction of the deontological response of not
harming. Of not committing the sacrificial harm, of not
harming the single person to save the 5 versus
the other way around. Um, THE, the way that
we interpret that effect is that, um, I mean,
moral judgment is to some extent about judging behavior,
about judging actions, but it's also about judging people,
um, and, uh, when we, we make a moral
judgment, obviously we, we, we will usually try and
pursue the, the course of action that we think
is best, but we do take into account what
other people. Might think about that as well, obviously,
um, and the moral judgments that we make, they
are in a way also a sort, they serve
a communicative purpose as well, um, and there's been
some research, and I'm sure we might talk about
this later as well, uh, that, that has suggested
that in general, um, people tend to prefer theontologists
over utilitarians and the way that we interpret it.
Our, um, our results is that people strategically shift
their responses towards the ontological side because it's the,
it's the more socially safe side to, to pursue.
Um, IT'S a little bit more risky, uh, people,
people might distrust you a little bit more if
you make utilitarian judgment, um, and that is why,
uh, we found a, a larger conformity effect, uh,
in the deontological direction versus utilitarian direction, yeah.
I mean, let me ask you this, with these
kinds of studies, are you interested in or is
it possible to tell whether people would be in
a sort of innate way predisposed toward the ontology
or toward consequentialism? I mean, is that something that
you're interested in exploring and is that something that
these studies can tell us or not?
Do you, do you, do you, do you mean,
uh, like, like, like personality wise, are people with
like more of a utilitarian personality, people with,
I mean, I mean, if, if, if, if in
terms, uh, uh, of course these are probably not
the best terms to use, but if in terms
of our human nature we tend to be more
predisposed toward preferring the ontology or consequentialism.
Um, I, um. I think there certainly have been
people that have been trying to, to show one
way or the other. Um, I'm, I'm myself would
be a little bit hesitant to say that the
type of studies that we're doing would be able
to answer that kind of question, um, because mainly
uh the amount of variety that I see in
in how people respond to these dilemmas and how
quickly people shift shift from one. Um, FROM one
option to the other, I find it's very hard
to, to make a kind of general statement like
people overall preferred the intelligence, people overall preferred utilitarians.
I think a lot of the dilemmas that we
have been using in the fields are also a
very specific set of dilemmas, um, and it's, it's,
it's. We haven't explored a sufficiently broad set of
dilemmas just yet um to be able to really
provide a, a good answer to that question.
Yeah, no, that's fair enough. I just wanted to
know if this was something that these kinds of
studies could answer or not. So, uh, you have
done experiments on people where they had to decide
whether to allow two Confederates to receive. A painful
electroshock or shock a third confederate. I mean this
is also a trolley type kind of problem. Which
results did you get and what motivations did people
provide for their choice?
Yeah, so the, the, the, this is, this, this
is somewhat have been my, my, my, my most
recent focus, um, actually that, that, that paper just
got accepted and this will be upcoming, uh, pretty
soon, um, so very timely question, um, but yeah,
so the, the, the main idea of that study
was, um, we're doing all of this research on
rota dilemmas and for like very obvious reasons we
can't go. Um, HIRE trains to run over people
like that would not be a fairly ethical way
to conduct research, um, and so a lot of
the research that we have been doing in moral
psychology is just asking people to reflect on these
moral dilemmas. Um, THERE'S a little bit of a
Asking someone to reflect on a dilemma or having
them actually respond to a dilemma with real consequences,
um. The two things are not fully the same
psychologically speaking, and so, so I have been looking
for ways to create, um, sort of trolley type
dilemmas within the lab and confront people with an
actual consequential real dilemma and see like how do
they behave. And so that was the, the, the
main idea behind that study and the way we
did that is like you described, um, I invited
participants to a lab and then I had 3
confederates there, 3 targets, all of which were hooked
up to electroshock machines and I would tell my
participants, hey, um. We're going to do a moral
dilemma today. Two of these people are going to
get a shock unless you decide. Um, TO shock
the single person instead. Um, THE results that we
found, I thought they were quite interesting, and there's
many different angles that we can, I can look
at, um, but as you pointed out, one of
the things that we also did is we had
people make these decisions and then we asked them
why did you make these decisions and, um, the
motivations that people gave for those, those decisions, I
thought they were quite interesting. Um, AND so just
to give like a sort of general summary of,
of what we found there is that when people
make. Uh, THE so-called utilitarian choice when they decided
to shock the single person to save it to
others, um, in almost all cases, they did motivate
that with a sort of cost-benefit analysis. They just
said that, well, I mean, if it, if, if
people are going to get hurt, I'm gonna pursue
the greater good, and it's better if only one
person gets hurt versus two. WHAT is interesting is
what, uh, how people motivated their choices. When they
didn't decide to do that, uh, there we actually
found what I feel is a great variety of,
of motivations. Um, THERE were some people that, um,
I wasn't really expecting this ahead of time that,
um, sort of said, um, I did not want
to hurt the single person because that person was
sitting alone and at least the two people, they
have each other. Um, SHARED harm is, is better
than having to suffer alone. Now just to be
clear, like, like everyone was sitting in one room,
like it was not like the one person was
separated. Uh, FROM the two waters they were like
everyone was sitting like 1 m apart, um, but
still like a lot of people were like, oh,
I didn't wanna. Uh, THE single person was already
sort of punished because they were sitting alone, um,
so that was a motivation that occurred quite often.
Some participants said, well, I didn't feel like it
was my responsibility to make this decision. Um, THE,
the sort of universe and fate had already decided
that these two people were going to get shocked
and, and who am I to interfere and interject
my own moral opinion in this sort of situation.
Um, DID it have a group of people, um,
which I would say corresponds a little bit more
with like the classic way that we're thinking about
these dilemmas that did actually say like I did
not want to actively harm others. I didn't wanna,
um, I thought it was bad. Um, I thought,
um, everyone had an equal right not to receive
a shock, um, and so, so what right do
I have to like sacrifice an innocent person. Um
And then you also had people that uh just
expressed like a a a and it might might
appear a little bit silly, but I don't think
it's, it's, it's, it's that silly a a preference
for like a specific person like like oh that
person was smiling at me, so I didn't want
to shock them with this, um, obviously from like
a philosophical perspective might not be the best argumentation
for that type of judgment. To me it sort
of corresponds with um. And maybe there's a little
bit farfetched, but, but almost like this moral dessert
type of thinking. I did not, I feel like
that person didn't deserve to be shocked. Um, AND
so one of the takeaways that we have from
that study is that And we tend to see
these, uh, to look at the judgments that people
make, it's just like it's deontological versus utilitarian, um.
But I struggle to, um, you could obviously argue
that what we're seeing in the deontological case is
that, um, the various types of motivations that weren't
governing there, that's sort of a post hoc, post
hoc reasoning that people are doing to sort of,
um, they don't want to commit to the judgment
and so they, they, they grasp onto every possible
explanation that they can, um. And that is like
we can't prove that with the studies that we've
done so far that these are actual things that
have influenced people's moral judgments. Um, BUT if you're
willing to sort of assume that, hey, maybe this
is actually cool, maybe, maybe people are being sincere
and maybe um. There are these different types of
motivations driving these judgments, and all of a sudden
there appears to be um all of these layers
that we've, that I feel had previously gone and
explored. Um, AND I think we can actually make
a good case that that is what is actually
going on because a lot of the things that
we're seeing, um, we are seeing in, in other
types of moral judgments that people make when And
For instance, the, the no responsibility type of judgment,
people that are saying, oh, I don't want to
get engaged. This is not my, my responsibility. We
make those judgments all the time. Like if you're
walking down the street and you see, you, you
see a homeless person, that is a sort of
moral dilemma that you're encountering then. But you, and
in many cases people will decide actively, this is
not my responsibility. This is not my, my moral
responsibility to solve, and I think that some of
what we're seeing. In, in this real life sacrificial
dharma is, is exactly that and um so one
of the things that we certainly want to, want
to try and do in the future is, is,
is, is disentangle that a little bit more and
see if we can really see are there different
types of psychological processes underlying these types of adjustments
versus just the ontological versus utilitarian.
I mean, that no responsibility approach that people might
have uh, I find it very interesting because, I
mean, from the perspective of moral philosophy or ethics
where instead of just trying to describe how people
react or respond to this kind of. Of problems
or moral dilemmas where we're trying to establish what
is the most moral way to conduct ourselves, whether
it is to divert the trolley toward the other
track and kill one person or just let the
other people die, um. I mean, is the, when
people say that they don't want to just interfere
or do anything because they're not responsible for what's
happening, wouldn't that be a philosophically valid approach as
well, because I mean, I, I'm just thinking that
if you find yourself in a situation where a
trolley is coming down the track. I mean, it's
not you causing that, and if you do something,
whatever happens, then it's your fault, right? So, I
mean, uh uh as a philosopher, because you're also
a philosopher, what do you think about that? Do
you think that's a valid uh ethical approach as
well?
Um, um, I mean, I would, I would say
it is, um, I, I, I, I think, um,
I mean, I gave the example of the homeless
person, right? Um, WE have to, we can't decide
with any moral dilemma situ, we can't engage with
any possible moral dilemma situation out there. There's, there's
plenty of moral dilemmas and, and horribly immoral things
going on over the world, all over the world
that we're actively choosing not to engage with. And
so we, we, we have to make those judgments
in, in, in some way, um. And so I
think, I, I think it's a, it's a valid
philosophical position to take. I also think it's just,
it's, it's a psychologically necessary thing that we need
to do. Um, IT'S, it's, it's. But it's also
something that I feel um we haven't fully taken
into account when it comes to studying how people
approach moral dilemmas because if we, if we present
people with a, with a hypothetical moral dilemma, we're
sort of assuming that they've already engaged with the
situation, right? We've, we've sort of, um, you won't
have, I mean, some, some, some, some people will
say like it's, it's, it's not my, um, If
you confront with a troy dilemma, a lot of
people will say, oh, I don't want to get
like sued, or I don't want to get like
a, um, I don't want to murder someone, and
then, you know, um, so there's some of that
there, um, but I, I, I don't think we
fully reckoned with the, the possible difference between people
refusing to engage with a moral dilemma versus people
actively deciding I don't want to harm someone. I
think, I think there, I think there's a, there's
a difference there, um, that we need to explore,
uh, further. Yeah,
mhm. No, yeah, that, that's very interesting. So let
me ask you now about sacrificial dilemmas and then
some of the principles associated with them. So, but
first of all, what is a sacrificial dilemma?
So the, the, the, the, the sacrificial dilemma, it's,
it's, it's, it's sort of, um, I tend to
use it as a similar term as trolley type
dilemma. I think I early in my career, I
think I used to call things troy type dilemmas,
and then eventually it's, I think the fields were
still sort of figuring out how do we, how
do we call this broader class of dilemmas, and
then, um, we eventually settled on sacrificial because it's
Um, that is, in a way that the, the
core problem that is underlying Islam, the problem of
sacrificial harm is appropriate to actively harm, to, um,
pursue it as a sort of greater good. So
that, I would say they're, they're troll type and
sacrificial. You can use those, uh, um, in the
same way.
OK, OK, fine, uh, but, uh, tell us then
about the action principle, the contact principle, and the
intention principle and how they play out in. SACRIFICIAL
or trolley type dilemmas.
I mean, so there's, there, there, there's, there's a
lot of variations that you can make in, in
Troy de lamas and, um, I guess the action,
like these three principles that you're, that you're calling
out, they're, they're big ones. They have been studied
quite a lot, um, and the, the core idea
of the action principle, for instance, is that people
tend to, uh, if you, uh, tend to think
it's, it's, it's worse to actively cause harm than
to cause harm by omitting an action. Um, IT,
it's, it's, it's, it's maybe a little bit of
an, an, an over the top example, but it's,
it's sort of, it's worse to push someone into
a river causing them to drown than to, if
you see someone drowning, not save them. Um, SO
committing a harm by action is worse than committing
a harm by inaction. Um, SIMILARLY, if you, if
you intend, uh, a harmful outcome. Um, THAT is
considered to be worse than if the, the harmful
outcome is the, is the result of a, a
sort of a by effect like it's collateral damage.
You do not necessarily intend to the harm, but
it is a, is a, is a, is a
side effect, um, and the contact principle is just
that people tend to think harm is worse when
uh the harm that you commit is, is, uh,
a close and personal, is, is direct. Uh, IF
it requires physical contact versus if it's a little
bit more indirect, um. And those, those, those three
differences, um, so those three principles have been studied
lots through sacrificial dilemmas and depending on like how
you, how you, which side of the principle that
you're on, um, you can push people's preferred response
around a little bit.
Mhm. And what are iterative sacrificial dilemmas, uh, and
how do they work and what kinds of results
do you get there?
Yeah, so the, the, the core idea behind iterative
dilemmas is that, um, when we, when we give
people moral dilemmas in a typical, uh, experiment. Um,
THOSE moral dilemmas, they're also, they're always sort of
isolated. They're always sort of within their own little
universe. Um, PEOPLE give one response and then, um,
there's nothing that happens after, there's nothing that comes
before, they're abstracted from time and space, and, and,
and if you think about that, that's actually very
different from how moral dilemma situations are in real
life in, in, in real life, um, there is
a prior history, there is a future history. And
there's never only one thing that you can do.
Um, YOU can react and then you can, you
know, see the outcome and you can possibly react
again and react again and react again, and um.
The, the, the, the, what we've done is, is
essentially we, we, um, confronted participants with a series
of sacrificial dilemma and essentially it was always the
same dilemma with the same targets, the same victims,
the same people involved, um, and we were just
interested like is that gonna change how people respond
to these dilemmas and, um, just like as, as
a, as a, as a classic example or less
as an easy example. In that uh that electroshock
study that we did, and that also included an
iterative element. So participants entered the room, they were
asked, OK, so the two people are going to
get shocked. Do you want to shock the single
person? And then, and they decided, some people got
shocked, and then, and they did not notice ahead
of time, we asked them, we basically said, OK,
we're going to do that same dilemma again. The
same two people are going to get shocked, and,
and you can decide once again to shock the
third person instead. And now, even though that is
in a way exactly the same dilemma situation, right,
it's the same people sitting there. Um, IT'S the
same type of shock. It's the same type of
do you want to harm one person to save
to others to pursue the greater, a greater good,
um, the, the, because we've repeated the dilemma, that
the underlying moral conflict has shifted and all of
a sudden it's not only about do you want
to minimize harm, it's also about how do you
want to balance harm, how do you want to,
do you want to pursue a fair outcome or
do you want to pursue. Uh, AN outcome, um,
that, um, leads to the greatest good. And, and
so what we, what we see is that, um,
And maybe this isn't too surprising, but in a
way it is quite surprising is that people do
really shift their responses quite heavily, um, and I
think the, the, the electroshock study, and we did
it twice and in the first, the first time
we did it, I think 35% of people switched
their response. I think in the second time we
did it, it was a little bit lower, um,
maybe 25% of people shifted their response in the
direction of um. Just just just just switch their
response, um, and if you then ask people like
why did you do it, um, all of a
sudden you see this new type of motivation emerge,
a motivation that wasn't present, um, when you ask
them about their motivations for the first decision, and
that is this, this, this idea of, oh, I
actually wanted to pursue a, a fair outcome, um,
I wanted to give everyone one single shock and
so that's, that's why I switched. And I think
it's important because it's, it's, it's something that we've
also been neglecting in the way that we've been
studying moral dilemmas. Um, WE'VE sort of been thinking
about, um, moral dilemmas as though they're every decision
is independent from another decision, and that's not how
morality works works at all. Um, EVERY moral decision
is dependent on decisions that come before it and
decisions that come after it and so. And if
we truly want to understand moral cognition, then we
have to also start to investigate that dependency across
decisions and so that's kind of the idea that
we've, uh, about these, these iterative dilemmas.
Mhm. Uh, WHAT is the dual process model for
moral cognition and how does it work?
Uh, SO the, the dual process model, uh, for
moral cognition, um. I, I think we're, we're, we're
almost approaching an anniversary for the model right now.
Um, I think that it was originally formulated in
2001, uh, by Joshua Green and, and his colleagues,
um, and, uh, essentially, um, the dual process model
posits that, um. It's sort of a classic dual
process model. It's, it's intuition versus deliberation, um, and
it links intuition and deliberation to two types of
responses when it comes to sacrificial dilemmas. Essentially it
says when you confront people with a sacrificial dilemma,
if you give them some time to deliberate, um,
if they are, they're motivated, if they have a
high motivation. Um, AND if they're not too emotionally
impacted, that will lead to a higher likelihood of,
um, a utilitarian decision of a, a decision that
weighs the costs and benefits. That is sort of
what the deliberative process is doing. It's weighing costs
and benefits. It's looking at outcomes, whereas, um. It
could also be the case, for instance, in the
foot bridge dilemma, um, you have to push someone
in front of the train, and that is a
very, um, well, emotionally impactful thing to have to
do, and so people like all of these, these
emotional alarm bells are ringing and then people are
like, oh, I don't even care about the outcomes
anymore, um, and that is what causes, um, a
deontological decision. So it's, it's, it's, it's sort of
like this, this idea that cognition will lead to
utilitarian decisions and, um. Emotion, intuition drives this sort
of um evaluation of the action itself, um, this,
this avowal of harm, yeah.
I mean, does, is there a relationship between cognitive
ability and consequentialist judgment? I mean, is it that
people with higher cognitive ability tend to favor consequentialism
or is there no relationship at all there?
Um, SO there, there, there are studies suggesting both
that it is and, and some studies that suggest,
um, That it's not the case. Um, I think
in general, I think, I think most people in
the field would say that um there is an
association, it might not be a super strong association
between cognitive ability and, um, respond, condoning the sacrificial
harm, responding in an egalitarian way and sacrificial dynammas,
um. We don't always tend to find it. I
myself have been very unlucky. It seems uh in
most of the things that I've done, um, I
don't really find this effect of, of either motivation
or ability on the types of judgments, um, that
people make, um, so my My personal opinion is
that I do think there's, there's something there, um,
I think it's mostly going to be there in
these types of dilemmas where there's a strong emotional
response that has to be overcome. Um, I'm a
little bit more hesitant to say that if you
were to look at all possible sacrificial dharmas, um,
you would still find that association. I, I think
it's likely true for a subset of dlamas. Um,
I don't think it's true for all the lamas,
um, for what it's worth in the, in the.
Electroshock studies that we've been doing, um, I tend
to find no effect whatsoever of, of, um. Short
measures of ability or measures of motivation on the
types of judgments that people prefer. I, I see
no. No difference.
Mhm. And do we know if there are any
other types of psychological traits that might predispose people
toward preferring the ontology or consequentialism slash utilitarianism?
Yeah, um, uh, so the, the. Actually, the, the
one, personality measure that I always seem to find
has an effect, um, is, is on the emotional
side of things. It's, it's, it's, it's for instance
like something like primary psychopathy, measures of, of anti-social
behavior, empathic concern, um, how easily are you affected
by these horrible things that you might have to
do in a dilemma, um, the, the, the, the.
The less that you care about those, the more
likely that you will be to condone the sacrificial
harm, and I tend to find much stronger and
consistent effects of those versus um Versus the the
the deliberation measures.
Right, so in that case, people who have the
the that kind of trait would prefer consequentialism,
yeah, yeah, yeah, um, yeah, so the, the, the,
the, the, the, if you score higher on like,
um, measures of anti-social thinking, um, you will tend
to prefer, uh, utilitarian side of things which has
also caused some debate in the field like are
we actually measuring utilitarianism which is supposed to be
this. Good thing worth pursuing if we're finding that
um psychopaths tend to tend to favor those types
of judgments um and and there's been some work
on that um. Um, SOME interesting work that, that,
that, that also suggests that, that we should think
about utilitarianism as having multiple facets. Um, THERE'S a
dimension of this instrumental harm dimension. Do you wanna,
are you OK with using others to pursue a
greater good, um, but also this dimension of, um,
impartial beneficence. Um, ARE you OK with, do, do
you, do you, do you want to spread well-being,
um. To everyone, basically. Um, AND but the the
the people that make that decision, that that split
tend to say like, oh, it's the, it's the
instrumental harm part that corresponds with antisocial thinking versus
the, the beneficial part. Mhm.
Yeah, OK. So, uh let me ask you now
because I know this is something that moral philosophers
and experimental philosophers debate sometimes. Are truly problems realistic?
I mean, do they really tell us how people
would behave in a real life situation?
Um, I think I think there's a lot of
layers to that question. Um, SO, so, um, One
of, one of the, so one of the reasons
why I'm, why I'm trying to study these, these
things in the lab is because I, I do
genuinely think that there's a difference between being actually
confronted with a dilemma and um thinking about a
dilemma in the abstract. Um, IF, if, if If
the question is like, are these dilemmas realistic, they're
obviously not realistic. Like, like a lot of them
are very unrealistic. The Troy dilemma itself is, is
horribly unrealistic. And that having said, it's not because
it's unrealistic that it might not, it might still
trigger psychological processes within our minds that corresponds to
the processes that would be triggered in a real
life similar situation. Um, SO it's, it's, I. I
would say that the realism is, is something that
we should worry about and, and there's some very
interesting research showing that um if you confront people
with these trolley dilemmas, um, they, they do tend
to be engaged, they do tend to like them,
they like the psychological intellectual exercise that they are,
um, some people find them very fun to do,
um, and then you could wonder, well, is that
actually like, like, like if you would encounter such
a situation in real life, it would not be
very fun. Um, AT all, um, and so it
is, it is something that we, I think do
need to take into account. I think it's something
that we have been neglecting a little bit too
much as a field, um. We like these dilemmas.
They're, they're, they're fun to think about, and I
think that's why we've been, been using them so
much, and they allow for, um, for a lot
of types of experimentation as well, right? Like it's,
it's, it's, it's very easy to shift vignettes around
a little bit and see, oh, what change, what,
what this change, what causes, what resulting change that
we see in our, in our moral cognition, and
but still, um, we should do more to try
and ground, um, our research a little bit more
in reality. Um If you're actually going to compare
like how do people think about it and what
do they do in the lab, um, we've, we've
done some studies on this, um. A good while
ago, um, we did a study where, uh, sort
of similar to the electroshock dilemma that I explained,
um, but where I invited people to the lab
and I did not have people hooked up to
electroshocks. I had cages of mice, so I had
one cage of 5 mice and I had another
cage of 1 mouse, and I said, You know,
um, very similar setup. The 5 mice are going
to get an electric shock, um, but you can
decide to shock the single mouse instead. And then
we had, um, some participants think about that dilemma.
Just we just read text-based vignettes, and others were
invited to the lab. And what we did find
there was that people were actually more likely to
commit the sacrificial harm, to shock the single mouse
in the real-life case versus the hypothetical case, um.
So there does seem to be like a shift
that happens like if you, if you, if you're
comparing the two, then I would say there's some
evidence, um, there's also similar evidence when you look
at VR virtual reality studies, people tend to prefer
sacrificial harm more in a VR virtual reality version
of a dilemma versus when they're just reading the
text and thinking about it. Um, AND so there
does seem to be something about making the dilemma
more real that shifts responses towards, uh, the sacrificial
harm side, utilitarian side, and so that could be
an argument to say that there's a difference here.
Um, ON the other side of things, um, we
have also looked at. If you ask people to
respond to a bunch of trolley dilemmas and then
you, you, you, you see, do their responses predict
what they actually do in real life, we do
also find a little bit of a, an association
there. So it's not like, like thinking about these
dilemmas is completely different than being exposed to them
in real life. The way that we think about
them does predict what they do in real life
as well. Um, IT'S not a super strong correlation.
Um, I think across studies we have something like
a correlation of, no, we have about um. 66%
of variation explained, um, which is not a tremendous
amount, but then again, like it's, it's, it's, it's
psychology, right? So with 6% of variation explained, maybe
we're already happy, I don't know, it depends on
your perspective. So my, my personal opinion on the
matter is that um. What we're doing in, in,
in these hypothetical dilemmas like, like, obviously that is
not completely um It's, it's, it's, it's, it relates
to how people behave in real life. Um, THAT
having said, if you put people in a real-life
dilemma situation, all these sorts of other elements start
to, start to sort of get pulled in situations,
and you can't fully replicate that in, in a
hypothetical vignette study. Um, ONE of the problems that
we've So I did those, those mouse studies and,
and um we, we tried to replicate those, those
initial results and actually the the the that paper
is also upcoming pretty soon. Um, AND just we
made some minor changes in the way that we
were administrating the dilemmas and that already led to
quite a shift in how people behaved, um, and
it is really hard to sort of, if you
have a hypothetical dilemma, just a text-based dilemma, to
create a situation in real life that is fully
comparable to that hypothetical dilemma. Just imagine, um, in
the, in the real-life case, for instance, we typically
work with a time limits. Let's say you have
20 seconds to react. And you could implement a
20-second time limit when you confront participants with a
hypothetical dilemma as well, but 20 seconds in the
real life situation might not be comparable to 20
seconds in a hypothetical situation. In a hypothetical situation,
there's all of these other sort of impulses coming
at people. It's a much more emotionally impactful situation
and just thinking about it. And so, Then all
of a sudden you have to wonder, OK, so
what would be a good comparison here? Like, like
how many seconds do we need to use in,
in one instance versus the other to, to, to
be able to even compare these two. Dilemmas that
are at the core they're the same, but they're
still very different experiences, right? And so if, if
the, if the answer is, can we, can we
use these hypothetical dilemmas to study real-life cognition, I
think we can, uh, but there's also real limits
to what we can learn from these hypothetical dilemmas
and at some point we as a field will
need to actually put people in the lab and
confront them consistently and systematically with, uh, with real
life dilemmas to see how people behave.
Mhm. So another kind of aspect of sacrificial moral
dilemmas you study or have studied is how people
infer moral character the moral character of others based
on how they resolve these moral dilemmas. So, uh,
what results do you get there? I mean, how
do people tend to evaluate the moral character depending
on how others respond to this dilemmas.
Yeah, we, we, we talked about it a little
bit previously already, um, and indeed like, like, like
every moral judgment is also like it has a
communicative purpose. Like if you make, if, if you,
if you, if you hate the, if, if you
disagree with the things that I disagree with, with,
or if you agree with the things that I
agree with, um, that will usually form a bond
between people. And what we tend to see in,
in these sacrificial lemmas or what we used to
see, um, I'll, I'll, I'll add a little bit
of a nuance at the end there. Is that
if you confront people with a sacrificial dilemma, um,
People will usually prefer others that make deontological judgments
versus those that make utilitarian judgments. Um, THAT basic
effect has been, um, I think, um, Professor Jim
Everett was the first one who wrote the first
paper about it, and it has been replicated a
bunch of times. We've replicated it as well. I've
found that results quite often, people tend to. Uh,
DISLIKE utilitarians more than they like the intelligence, than
to trust utilitarians less than they trust theontologists. Um,
That has a lot of downstream consequences. There's even
some studies showing that, um, obviously in the abstract,
but if, if, if you, if you ask people
who would you prefer as a mate, for instance,
uh, people will tend to favor the ontologists versus
utilitarians. There's a few wrinkles to that. In some
cases, people do actually prefer utilitarians. Um, IF you,
uh, meet a sort of like a general, like
a cold ruthless leader. Um, THEN you might actually
prefer someone that is a bit more utilitarian and
a bit more pragmatic in the types of moral
judgments that they make, um. Than than theontologist, I,
I think some of the, the reasons why we
tend to find the judgments, I think are related
to what we've talked about previously as well is
that um one of the reasons why someone might
prefer utilitarian judgment is because they might just not
care about the harm um if someone scores high
on our anti-social measures, um. They prefer utilitarian judgments
and maybe some of what we're seeing is that
where people are making these utitarian judgments and think,
oh, this might be a genuine concern for the
greater good, but it might also just be a
psychopath, um, and that is why we, we sort
of see this distrust emerge, um, but also be
related to, um, there's some research suggesting that it's
related to, to, um, predictability. Um, SOMEONE that's a
dontologist, some of that will always go like, oh,
I don't want to harm anyone else. Um, IT'S
a bit more predictable and might because of that,
be a little bit more preferable as a, as
a partner, as a cooperation partner than, you know,
a utilitarian, which is great when you're on the,
the right side of the track, but if you're
on the wrong side of the track, you, they
might decide against you. Um, But I will say
um some of the more recent research that we've
been doing is um Cause when we A few
years ago, I started doing this type of who
do people prefer uh with iterative dilemas, um, like
in these sequences of decisions, and who do people
prefer there and there we consistently were finding that
people actually liked utilitarians more than they liked the
theonhologists, which was Um, very strange and which went
against an entire literature and initially confused us very
much, um, and so what we hadn't been taken
into account, I think hasn't been taken into account
in a lot of this research is that I've
already hinted at it. People tend to prefer similar
odors, and within the fields, um, a lot of
the dilemmas that we have been using have been
dilemmas that most people will prefer a, um, uh,
a deontological response to. And so some of the
preference that we're seeing for Utilitarians does not appear
to be like a, uh, on every type of
sacrificial dilemma. People prefer theontologists over utilitarians. It really
depends on the dilemma, um, and so we've, we've,
we, we've done, we've done one study where in
study one we found, oh, people prefer, prefer utilitarians,
and in study 20, people prefer deontologists, um, and
what seems to be going on is that a
lot of the difference is just explained by similarity.
People prefer. The ones that have the same judgments
as they do, the anthologists prefer the anthologists and
utilitarians prefer utilitarians, and once you start controlling for
that, um, the, the difference between Um, trust for
citytarians and trust for city nithologists, it, it sort
of gets, gets diminished a lot. I think in
general, um. Based on, because there is this huge
literature that people prefer the anthologists, I would still
be tempted to say there likely is something there,
um, but it is, the effect is much more
variable and much more vulnerable than, um, if you
had asked me this question five years ago, I
would have been like, oh yeah, certainly people, uh,
people hate utilitarians. Now I'm like it really depends
on the type of moral dilemma that we're dealing
with. Um, YEAH.
Yeah, no, that's very interesting. So I have one
last question then. uh, IN the real life situation,
people can also choose, and we've already touched a
little bit on this, but I want to ask
you directly, so people, people can also choose to
just exit the social dilemma. Do people do so
and if so, why?
It's, it's, it's. It's also something that we haven't
really been, been, been studying a lot, um, and,
and you're right, like, like, like, like, like when,
when people are confronted with a hypothetical dilemma, again,
like engagement is assumed, right? And so, so we
don't really allow people the possibility to, to exit
the dilemma. I think it happens in real life.
I think people, um, decide to leave moral dilemma
situations all the time, um, but it is hard
to study. Um, I, I, I guess one way
of Sting it would be in like sort of
the lab studies that we have been doing and
in those lab studies we have encountered a few
times, not a lot. I think by now I've
done. I think I've exposed over 1800 participants like
this, these, these types of real-life lab dilemmas. So
far, um, and across the 1800, I think. Maybe
1011 or 12 when they encountered the dilemma we're
like, oh, I would rather not participate in this.
I would like to exit the situation. Um, IT
happened a bit more in the mouse dilemmas than
it happens when in the, in the electoral dilemmas
with people, um, and the, the main driver of
that was always, um, people that have this, this
very high concern for, for animal welfare, um. There
were a couple of people there that had patronized
themselves and that just, just, um. Really could not
participate. They were like, they were like like this,
this, this, this, this, this is, this is potential
animal abuse. Um, I don't want to partake in
this at all. And so that's, it's, it's, it's
in those cases, it was like a really strong
moral concern, um, about the animals, um. Maybe I
need to add though, like, like in those experiments
we didn't actually harm any animals like we, we,
we just pretended that we're going to harm animals,
um, and then as soon as people made a
decision, we just stopped the experiments and so no
mice were harmed, um, over the course of that
experiment, but that was the main, the main, the
main driver of people deciding to engage, to disengage
from the situation. It's just a concern for, for
animal welfare welfare, um. I, I, I think in
general, I, I think people might exit social dilemma
situations for multiple reasons. Um, I think one of
the reasons might be they're just emotionally overwhelmed and
so they're just shutting down. Um, I think another
reason might also just be they, they, um, They're
confronted with, with a bunch of options and they
don't like any of them. And so, um, as
a sort of result of that, they, they rather
than pick one of the, the options that they
really don't want to pick, they just go, I
don't wanna, I don't want to deal with this
at all, um. Or it might also be just,
just, just. People were never fully engaged with the
situation at all. Um, SORT of what we talked
about previously with this, this, there's no responsibility, uh,
idea is that, is that people were, are like.
It's not my, it's not, it's not my place
to make a decision here, um, and that that
might cause people to sort of step back from
the loan situation. Um, I think it definitely happens.
I also think we, I also don't think that
we have sufficient good data on it just yet,
and I, um, everyone would definitely be interested in,
in doing some more research on in, in that
direction, yeah.
Mhm. OK, so would you like to tell us
what are the kinds of things you will be
working on in the near future and are they
also related to these kinds of uh psychological and
philosophical exploration of truly type moral dilemmas or something
else?
Yeah, uh, so, so, um, My main focus for
the future, um, though I, I, I will need
to get some more grant money to actually get
it going, um, well, like, like I want to
put people in laps and confront them with, with,
with real-life moral dilemmas, and, um, I think the
basic setup that we have right now with the,
the electroshocks and, and shocking people is a, it's
a very rich setup already. Um, THERE'S a lot
of things that you can tweak about that setup
to see how it impacts people's moral judgments. Um,
SO like just to give like one example, um.
In, um, in the studies that we've conducted so
far, like the basic, basic version is just, um,
you have 3 people sitting there and they are
all men or all women. Um, ONE manipulation that
you could do is you could do, oh, it's,
it's 2 men versus 1 woman, 1 woman versus
2 men, and see to what extent does the,
the, the general characteristics of the victims, to what
extent does that drive the types of judgments that
people prefer, or you could, you could manipulate the
way in which that harm needs to be done
in one version of the experiments. Um, WE separated
the participants and the, the targets, uh, with a
one-way, one-way mirror, um, so participants could see the
targets, the Confederates, um, but not vice versa, and
another way, in another version of the experiments, and
they were all located in the same room and
then the participants had to. Commit the sacrificial harm
in the one way, the mirror version, they could
do it in, in their room, they just have
to press a button there and in the, in
the one room version, and participants had to walk
up to the victim and actually touch them on
the arm and so it's much more emotionally direct
experience, um, and there's, there's also, there's all these
sorts of parameters that can play, but you could
give participants the option to shock themselves, for instance,
and see, um, when will people decide in favor
of, of self-harm. Um, YOU could, you could tell
participants something about the people that are sitting there.
Like maybe someone is like a volunteer for a
charity. To what extent are people going to weigh
that? And I think it's a very rich setup
that we can use to explore, um, not just
how people respond to sacrificial dilemmas, but how they
respond to, to moral dilemmas in general because I
feel. And we have, we talked about the dual
process model, which is a, um, which has been
a, a very influential and, and, and important model
to sort of explain how do people respond to
sacrificial dilemmas, um, but there's many different types of
moral dilemmas out there, right? Um, IF you, um,
I don't know, if you, if your co-worker did
something wrong and you have to like wait, do
I want to tell my boss yes or no.
Um, THAT is also a moral dilemma, but it's
not really a sacrificial dilemma, and so we don't
really have a, a good, um, process theory for
what goes on in the mind when people are
confronted with a dilemma like that, and I think,
um. By confronting people in the lab with real
dilemmas, um, we can work towards a more general
sort of process model for how people cope with
moral dilemmas, and I think we can start with
the dual process model, um, but what some of
our studies with these real real dilemmas have already
shown is that the dual process model cannot explain
everything that's out there. The dual process model does
not really explain why people, when you confront them
with these types of iterative dilemmas, why they switch.
Um, IT talks about not wanting to harm others.
It talks about utitarianism. It doesn't talk about when
people go, actually, I don't want to just minimize
harm. I want to spread harm fairly. That's sort
of new moral concern that's emerging, and we don't
know what drives people to stay with the utilitarian
choice or what drives them towards the fairness choice.
And so I think we, we have a, a
core set up here that will allow for a
lot of more, um. Variation in moral judgments to
explore in a real-life lab set setting and just
by just systematic manipulations, we will be able to
uh create better models. Um, EVENTUALLY, I would also
like to just. Design out of real life world
delamos that we can set in the lab um.
The, the, I very much like this electroshock paradigm.
I think it's, there's a lot of things to
be done there, um, but just in the way
that, um, roda lamas are not realistic, um, like
going into a lab and having to make decisions
about who you want to shock is arguably also
not really realistic. Like it's not a type of
choice that people encounter a lot in, in, in,
in their, in their day to day, um. Again,
I do think that we can use it to
study some of the psychological processes that work in
real life cognition, but it's still a very artificial
situation, and I would like to explore a wider
variety of moral dilemma situations in the lab. And
so that's, that's essentially gonna be my, my focus
for the, the next couple of years, um, try
and get some money to do this, to, to
do more of these studies and, um, really explore
the, the difference between. What can thinking about these
lamas, what can that teach us versus if you
put people in these situations, how do they react
and, and that tension and the similarities and differences
that emerge that is really going to be my
main research interest.
And where can people find your work on the
internet?
Um, SO I am on Twitter, uh, still, or
X or whatever we call it nowadays. Um, I
should actually, I don't even know my username username.
I think DH Boston, um, will probably, if you
just Google this Boston, um, I'm, I'm sure I
have, I have a personal website, it will emerge.
Um, I'm very easily findable on scholar, um. People
should not hesitate to reach out. Um, I'm always
happy to talk. I'm always happy to have a
chat, especially about these sorts of things, um, yeah.
OK, thank you so much for taking the time
to come on the show. It's been a real
pleasure to talk with you.
No, thank you very much for having me and
for dealing with the, the, the little bit of
the situation we had halfway through. Um, NO, it's
been a, it's been, it's been a very enjoyable
conversation, yeah.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nico Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolati, Gabriel Pancortez or
Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, anny Smith, and
Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Gelbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink,
Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al Nick
Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.